As a handbook this guide is intended not just to help and inform, but also to provoke and
inspire. The contributors are professionals within their fields of expertise and apart from
being asked to cover the necessary topic have been free to deal with their subject how they
see fit – there has been no attempt to produce regulation and uniform chapters. The book
is aimed primarily at the student embarking on a creative writing programme in Higher
Education, with many of the writers here also teaching on creative writing MAs or MFAs,
and to that end many of the chapters reflect the different teaching styles on offer. This
book, therefore, is also intended for tutors. The aim throughout has been to have within
the pages of a single book all that you might need as a writer or tutor to further your writing
and teaching, and to further your writing career. It explores a number of different contexts
within which the student-writer and teacher of creative writing work: literary tradition and
genre, the postgraduate degree, the academy, literary culture, literary theory, the world of
publishing and production, the world of being a writer and writing.
How to read this book
I don’t for a second imagine that anybody will read this book from cover to cover; it is not
that type of book. Rather, it is the virtue of a handbook that readers can jump immediately
to what they need to know: I want to write a novel (Rogers); teach creative writing in the
community (Sargent); introduce literary theory into my workshops (Ramey); publish
poetry (Twichell; O’Brien); get an agent (Smith; Friedmann; Brodie), choose a degree
(Newman; Vanderslice) and so on. Conversely, if you have no interest in cultural, academic or theoretical contexts you will quickly see that you should avoid Section One, and if
you have no interest in knowing how to get your writing out into the ‘real’ world and make
a splash as a writer, you will turn a blind eye to Section Three (although I gather that this
rather unlikely). But if you were, indeed, to be the ‘ideal reader’ and read the book from
one end to the other, you might make a number of surprising connections.
For instance, Brian Kiteley’s ‘Reading and Writing Historical Fiction’ and David Rain’s
‘Literary Genres’ include digressions into different aspects of the history of the novel, and
might be read in conjunction with Jane Rogers’s ‘Introduction to the Novel’. Aaron
Kunin’s ‘New Poetries’ is packed full of references to experiments with writing and concepts and takes the reader well beyond the realms of poetry. It could be read alongside
Thalia Field’s chapter on ‘Experimental Writing’, after which there would be the surprise
of a different kind of experimental writing to be found in Linda Sargent’s ‘Writing in the
Community’. You certainly might expect to find mention of the experimental French group
of writers known as Oulipo in ‘New Poetries’, but you will also find an Oulipo exercise in
the chapter on historical fiction. Both Alan Brown’s ‘Writing for Children’ and Linda
Newbery’s ‘Writing for Teenagers’ might open your eyes to ways of thinking about writing
which draw on creative processes you might not otherwise encounter, even if you only
intend to write for ‘grown-ups’. The chapter on ‘Writing as “Therapy”’ might be a long way
down the list of chapters to read if your first interest is ‘Form in Poetry’, but in Fiona
Sampson’s piece you will find a section on how text affects audience, spurred on by the poet
John Kinsella, and discussing Keats, Kathleen Jamie, Celan, Pound, Eliot, amongst others,
along the way. In passing you would note that there are some common reference points:
Aristotle’s Poetics recurs time and again; T. S. Eliot’s ‘Tradition and the Individual Talent’
is surprisingly popular, and William Goldman’s dictum, ‘get in late, get out early’ is commandeered by novel, short story and script.
Also remember that many of the contributors are both writers and teachers. All the
pieces have a great enthusiasm. You have only to read Lauri Ramey’s piece on ‘Creative
Writing and Critical Theory’ to know that to be involved in her class would treat you to a
full-on immersion in both criticism and creativity, alongside the broadest of historical
sweeps, and would instil a sense of just how exciting and potent these activities can be for
your own writing. And Gareth Creer’s plea for the teaching of writing as something that is
much, much more than a means of supplementing an income that is always widely variable shows that creative writing teaching, in and out of the academy, can be a necessary
part of the writer’s writing life. You will frequently encounter ideas you will want to introduce into your own practice.
The different approaches offer different models of teaching and reflect the success, or
otherwise, of different kinds of writing within contemporary culture. Lee Gutkind’s chapter
is a replication of teaching ‘creative nonfiction’ via seminars and workshops, as is E. A.
Markham’s chapter on the short story. Sean O’Brien’s ‘Introduction to Poetry’ gives practical advice on the use of a workshop, and what should constitute a good one. Some chapters stand as polemic and some as defences for types of writing regarded as ‘lesser’ in the
context of creative writing (for example, Susan Bassnett’s chapter on ‘Translation’ and also
James Sheard’s ‘Writing for the Web’), or little considered (‘Writing for Radio’ in Mike
Harris’s chapter, and also in Alan Brodie’s ‘The Literary Agent: Television, Radio and
Theatre’). Sean O’Brien’s attack on the dominance of prose over poetry in his essay on
‘Verse Drama’ has a corollary in Susan Bassnett’s note on the 1940s Penguin Classics translations of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey into prose form rather than a poetic equivalent.
O’Brien’s chapter highlights verse drama’s current near-invisibility and decline and
amounts to a virtual ‘recovery’ of its possibilities and models. Similarly, George Szirtes’
chapter champions other poetic art forms that struggle for a good hearing, the long poem
and the sequence, and Alan Brodie makes a heartfelt plea for Radio Drama as the purest
medium for the scriptwriter. But a book such as this also gives you the opportunity to think
about trying out writing you might not normally have considered. Judith Barrington’s
chapter on ‘Writing the Memoir’ begins by dispelling the belief that it is a form available
only to ‘the famous’. Any prose writer would benefit from this chapter as it works through
the shaping of narrative. I hope that one of the joys of this book is that, in addition to its
primary functions, it has chapters that will reward those curious about all aspects of literary culture and writing.
2 Introduction
The book also includes insights into areas of writing and writing contexts that will hopefully be new or unusual. For instance, a continuing assumption by some is that the activities of literary criticism and creative writing make unhappy bedfellows within the academy,
with criticism the established forum for literature and creative writing an unwelcome
johnny-come-lately. Lauri Ramey’s chapter here not only demonstrates the shared heritage
for both but the ways in which critical studies from Longinus onwards can be used to engage
with creativity, the role of the writer and writing. Similarly, thinking about ‘genre’ may not
immediately spring to mind as a way in to creativity, but its importance is here shown in
David Rain’s chapter as another feature of contemporary literary culture which has its roots
in the Classical age and which can inform the practice of writing and our reflection upon
it. But genre isn’t just about what we are writing, it is about how we are reading and what
we are expecting when we do pick up a poem or novel, or sit down to watch a film or play.
And, with the history of the novel as a model, Rain shows how new genres and new literature comes into being. Genre is one of the broadest contexts within which a writer can
work, yet the student writer is rarely called upon to explore it unless perhaps asked to define
the difference between ‘literary’ and ‘genre’ fiction (also discussed in Rain’s chapter; and
you will find an exercise to understand genre in Mike Harris’s ‘Introduction to
Scriptwriting’ and discussion of ‘genre’ in ‘Science Fiction and Fantasy’ by Crawford Kilian
and ‘Writing Crime Fiction’ by John Dale). Exploration of genre inevitably takes us into
questions of originality and levels of artistic ambition (also addressed by Lauri Ramey in
the context of literary criticism, and in my chapter on ‘The Role of the Artist’), what kind
of writing ‘enables’ others to write, and what can only be admired as one-off performances.
Thus Rain asserts: ‘Genre is the most important decision a writer makes’. It is a rare starting point for creative writing, but a fruitful one.
As Swander, Leahy and Cantrell point out in their chapter on ‘Theories of Creativity
and Creative Writing Pedagogy’, creative writing within the academy has had a rather
difficult time compared to other arts. Artists and composers predated the arrival of
writers into academe, where it was not until the 1920s that writing started to lay down
roots at the University of Iowa, the institution usually credited with being the first university to embrace creative writing. Elsewhere in the chapter the authors note that the
writing programme there has to good effect been underpinned by the Romantic myth
that writers are born, not created in the workshop, and that the academy can at best
provide an environment for talent to develop. Nevertheless, the danger of this approach
for the academy is clear: ‘To state openly and confidently that creative writing cannot
be taught, however, puts the field at risk as a serious academic pursuit’. Its staple method
of teaching, the workshop, is ‘non-traditional’, and, it is often argued, creative writing
cannot be assessed and evaluated in the same manner as other academic subjects. At
the same time as creative writing is firmly within the academy in the US, the UK and
elsewhere, some of these issues remain (see Jenny Newman’s essay on ‘Evaluation and
Assessment’). The tension is not always generated by the literary critics either: it is not
unusual for writers themselves to have mixed feelings about their place within the
academy, especially those who have not gone through a creative writing programme.
The growth of creative writing within the academy, its emphasis on process rather than
product through the workshop event and its ways of assessment, has meant that it has
developed what Swander, Leahy and Cantrell here identify as a ‘signature pedagogy’: a
way of teaching, learning and assessment specific to creative writing. As Paul Dawson
points out, creative writing programmes cannot just claim to be about the passing down
of craft, since they ‘exist in an intellectual environment of interdisciplinarity, critical
Introduction 3
self-reflection and oppositional politics on the one hand, and in an institutional environment of learning outcomes, transferable skills and competitive research funding on
the other’ (‘The Future of Creative Writing’). In America, creative writing has often
been seen in opposition to theory, whereas in Australia and the UK it emerged in the
last two decades alongside theory to challenge what was regarded as a literary studies
status quo. Dawson warns that to continue to begin discussions with the opposition
between literary theory and creative writing will lead to a stasis. After all, he claims,
Creative Writing in the academy is hardly a subject in crisis; instead it flourishes in a
‘post-theory’ environment. To nail an old problem in relation to creative writing in
academia, he states: ‘If the question which once dominated discussions of Creative
Writing was, “Can or should writing be taught?”, it is now, “What should we be teaching students?”’ This book shows just what is being taught, and also, I think, what might
be taught.
The one thing needful: reading
What may come as a surprise to some is that time and again authors in this book recommend reading first and foremost. I remember a student presenting to the class a scene from
a novel he was working on which concerned two children on holiday. One of the children
becomes trapped as the sea is coming in while the other looks on helplessly, and the
description of the drowning was cool and unnerving, capped by a very affecting finale. The
writer later told me that some of his fellow students would ask him how he had achieved
such an accomplished piece of writing, such an effect. This puzzled (and annoyed) him:
you simply read how others did it and moved on from there. How else would you go about
it? It was obvious.
The fact that this was something of a revelation to other students no doubt gives some
credence to the charge from tutors that students don’t read enough, and John Milne in
‘How to be a Writer’ couldn’t state it more clearly: ‘To write you need to read’. Tutors will
also say that the best readers make the best writers. This book is full of references to other
works of literature, film, and criticism, and thus gives a generous and exciting reading list.
It is not uncommon for courses to begin by asking each student to suggest one or two books
that everybody might read, and in that way create a common fund of reading which is specific to that group. E. A. Markham’s chapter here begins by setting out what he expects the
student to read if he or she is to grasp the complexities of the short story form and gain an
understanding of its history; Brighde Mullins’ piece on writing for theatre advises: ‘It is
important that you are able to locate the sources of your connection to the theatre, and to
read and see as many plays as you can before you start writing for the stage’; and Susan
Hubbard writes ‘There’s no better way to learn to write humour than to read it’. John Milne
gives a host of other reasons why reading will help you as a writer, and Mary Mount puts it
just as clearly from the editor’s point of view: ‘Do read, read, read’. Being a better writer is
also about becoming a better reader, as John Dale says: ‘Reading good fiction is not passive
like watching bad TV, it requires engagement, concentration to enter the fictional world’.
Writing and re-writing
Authors have also been generous in giving away their exercises. In his essay on ‘Form’
in poetry, W. N. Herbert remarks: ‘In the same way as a musician or dancer must repeat
an action enough times for the neural pathways to be established, for the body to learn
4 Introduction
what is required of it, so too rhythmic awareness needs time to accommodate itself to
verbal dexterity’. The same could be said of writing in general – the necessity to keep
on writing is rather like exercises in other art forms. I had one tutor who used to start
each workshop with a writing task as a means of ‘warming up’. Although I am used to
this when playing a musical instrument, it never occurred to me that you would do the
same for writing, since, no doubt like many others on the course, I always thought that
writing ‘just happened’ – more or less – if you wanted it to happen. You will see throughout this book exercises for you to try out, for easing into writing, or as a means of getting
out of a writing rut. The poet Ian Duhig once gave a Masterclass at which he read a
number of poems that had started out as exercises. He noted that other poets were often
quite sniffy about such pieces, but couldn’t see how the objection could be sustained
when it produced such results: hang on to your exercises.
I have already intimated that there may be a belief that writing just ‘happens’, that
writers are simply inspired one way or another and that’s the end of it. Such a view does
have the tendency to elide the graft that is everywhere evident and necessary. Bonnie
O’Neill in her chapter on ‘Writing for Film’ declares: ‘Re-write, re-write, re-write’, and
E. A. Markham begins with revision. Any practising writer will tell you that re-writing or
redrafting is the hardest thing. After all, inspiration is easy: you just have to be there. John
Dale serves up the following advice: ‘Thomas Mann said that a writer is somebody for
whom writing is more difficult than it is for other people. And it’s true. Good writing is
hard work and looks easy. It has energy yet never appears rushed’. So just as you will be
urged to read, you will be urged to re-write, to revise, to redraft. Be your ‘inner editor’, as
Crawford Kilian puts it.
The Masters experience
There’s nothing quite like taking a creative-writing postgraduate degree, nor, for that
matter, teaching on one. Here is an absolute community of writers whose whole activity is to talk about writing, share writing, and see how it might be improved. Although
degrees may be structured differently from country to country, the sense of excitement,
ambition and challenge is familiar across countries and continents (for comparisons of
degree structures see Jenny Newman’s chapter [UK] and Stephanie Vanderslice’s [US],
and look at Graeme Harper’s, which compares different formats for creative-writing
higher degrees in the US, UK, Australia and Canada). A number of the chapters touch
on the tension that creative writing within the academy creates and undergoes, including modules where creative-writing students are expected to engage with academic, theoretical and critical work (Lauri Ramey; Scott McCracken). As McCracken notes:
‘Ideas such as the “death of the author”, which can seem fresh and exciting in a third
year undergraduate seminar on a traditional English degree, can appear absurd in a room
full of struggling novelists; and their derision is hardly likely to be contradicted by a creative writing tutor who writes to live’. Nevertheless, the experience of doing a creativewriting Masters is something quite unique, as Sean O’Brien states in his ‘Introduction
to Poetry’: ‘The poet studying on a Writing course should feel free – no, should feel
obliged – to be imaginatively and intellectually gluttonous. You may never have a better
opportunity. Enjoy it!’ The input from tutors and other writers is a constant incentive
to read more and to improve your writing. It is very difficult to discover the same weekby-week intensity and sense of belonging to the writing community outside of this environment, and it can take some students a while to adjust to the essentially ‘lonely’
Introduction 5
occupation that writing is once the class has been left behind, although it is not unusual
for a group to continue to meet after formal sessions have ended. I have even seen one
group which rotated the ‘role of tutor’ so that it replicated the workshop situation the
students had been used to. As Jenny Newman points out, you should make the most of
all the feedback that you get while it is there. It is not so easy to come by once the degree
is over.
The writer’s life
For most students (not all), one of the reasons for taking a creative-writing Masters is
that it is a route to publication. Not only will you be improving your writing and be
immersed in a hot-bed of intellectual endeavour, you will expect to see a procession of
famous writers, top agents and classy publishers throw themselves at your feet.
Undoubtedly MA/MFA programmes are important in giving the opportunities for
student-writers to come into contact with the ‘business end’ of writing. One of the
advantages of such contacts is that the world of publishing and production and agenting is seen to consist of people who have as much interest in providing good literature
as you have. Agents often get a bad press, somehow stuck in the middle between publishers and writers, harder to get than a publisher if you’re not already known and simply
creaming off unearned percentages of those who probably don’t need an agent. The
chapters on publishers and agents in this book should deliver quite a different message,
with both practical advice and a wider sense of the contexts within which they are
working.
Equally, if you are looking at what life as a writer might be, you will no doubt be
drawn to John Milne’s ‘How to be a Writer’, Livi Michael’s ‘Making a Living as a Writer’
and Tom Shapcott’s chapter on ‘Literary Life: Prizes, Anthologies, Festivals, Reviewing,
Grants’. In addition, you should look at Gareth Creer’s ‘The Writer as Teacher’, which
shows the benefits of expanding your repertoire as writer and teacher, and the mutually
beneficial rewards of both activities. The latter piece also takes in life as a student of
creative writing, and in Sean O’Brien’s ‘Introduction to Poetry’ you will find advice on
the pressures of combining a commitment to writing with life elsewhere. The word here
is ‘vocation’, and although aimed specifically at poets it could be taken as referring to
all those serious about writing. Mary Mount’s ‘The World of Publishing’ will give you
insights into how the world looks like from that end of fiction, and Alison Baverstock’s
‘How to Get Published’ will give you a measure of how professional you need to be
beyond the writing (as will Livi Michael’s chapter). Students often believe that things
will take care of themselves based on the merit of their writing, but as all these pieces
will indicate, this is very far from the truth, even for those writers who gain a relatively
easy path to publishing. Writers require robustness and a thick skin. Mary Mount warns:
‘Don’t expect fame and money! There are easier and quicker ways to get rich and
famous’, and Sean O’Brien suggests that anyone wanting to be a poet who expects to
make money is either a fool or a charlatan. ‘Don’t despair!’ is thus another theme
running through the book. Writing is hard work, and sometimes the writing has to be
its own reward: ‘Most published writers have experienced the torturous path that got us
to where we wanted to be . . . And what probably kept us motivated throughout this
was our sense of ourselves as writers’ (Alison Baverstock); or John Dale: ‘Above all, a
writer needs persistence’. But of course some writers have ‘excess’ energy, a desire to be
active in the culture of writing and publication beyond their own immediate writing:
6 Introduction
for these I would suggest taking a look at Rebecca Wolff’s chapter ‘How to Start a
Literary Magazine’ (a chapter which includes a fair amount of advice on being an editor,
and through which I winced in agreement).
National differences
The contributors to this book come from the UK, America, Canada and Australia, and
naturally are drawn to examples from the cultures they are more familiar with, although
when it comes to literary references these show an international understanding. On a
couple of occasions it was felt that the differences warranted separate chapters: the systems
of evaluation (if not necessarily delivery) of creative-writing Masters in the UK and
America are quite different, and publishing poetry in the UK and publishing in the US are
treated separately. There are also differences in relation to the creative-writing PhD, but
these are dealt with specifically in Graeme Harper’s essay on that topic, and the reader will
also find useful comments on Masters and Doctoral degrees across all four countries in Paul
Dawson’s chapter. The chapter on ‘Copyright’ takes into account copyright law in all four
countries mentioned. Stephen V. Duncan’s chapter on ‘Writing for Television’ is geared
towards the American system, but most of the points made apply equally to such writing
elsewhere, and any writer would always be advised to research the policies of television
companies and agents in their own country before attempting approaches, even if not
specifically covered in this part. The differences between the UK and US are dealt with in
John Milne’s following piece, written as a complement to Duncan’s. Fiona Sampson’s
chapter on ‘Writing as “Therapy”’ and Linda Sargent’s on ‘Writing in the Community’ are
drawn very much from local experience, as you might expect, but have general application,
both theoretically and practically.
Enjoy the book
These chapters open up worlds of writing and worlds of imagination, ways of thinking
about form, structure, plot, language, character, genre, creativity, reading, teaching, audience . . . and being a writer. I hope you enjoy it.
Steven Earnshaw

Theories of Creativity and
Creative Writing Pedagogy
Mary Swander, Anna Leahy, and Mary Cantrell
Creative writing as a distinct academic field – one with dedicated courses and programmes, with professors whose scholarship is entirely or primarily original creative work,
and with professional journals and books devoted to reflections upon the field – is relatively new but has been rapidly expanding in the US, the UK, and elsewhere. As such, we
are just beginning to amass articulated theories about the creative process and how we
might best teach creative writing as an academic discipline. Joseph Moxley (1989),
Wendy Bishop and Hans Ostrom (1994), and D. G. Meyers (1996) documented the emergence of creative writing as an academic pursuit in the US. To grasp the current state of
the field, it is important to consider its overall and recent history, the dominant
approaches to creativity and to creative writing pedagogy, and the application of theories
and approaches to classrooms.
The history of creative writing as an academic pursuit
Today, in virtually every college and university across the US, students busily workshop, as
we say, each other’s poems and short stories. These students roam the hallways with stacks
of copied poems, stories, and essays. They enter their creative writing classrooms, pull out
their marginal notes, and prepare to discuss and offer formative criticism of each other’s
work. Creative writing is now an established part of the curriculum in higher education,
and most English departments have a poet, fiction writer, or playwright on their rosters.
According to Gradschools.com, a comprehensive site on graduate programmes worldwide,
the UK, Australia, Ireland, and Canada all have universities offering university and graduate programmes leading to degrees with an emphasis in creative writing. Korea, Mexico,
Spain, Norway, and the Philippines also support such programmes. Even high school students in both the US and the UK are often offered the opportunity for creative writing as
part of their English studies.
Yet the inclusion of creative writing in academe in the US is a relatively recent phenomenon. As late as 1965, few four-year colleges had resident writers, much less an emphasis in creative writing. While it had become more common for writers to accept university
teaching positions, most writers supported their early efforts as they always had: as cabdrivers and carpenters, as postmasters (William Faulkner), journalists (Willa Cather),
librarians (Marianne Moore), insurance executives (Wallace Stevens), and doctors
(William Carlos Williams). Visual artists and composers had long before found a home in
academe, but writers were still viewed with suspicion. Writing was a craft that one was supposed to pick up by osmosis through a study of literature. If a young writer wanted a mentor,
he or she could move to either coast or, better yet, to Paris, buy a cigarette holder and beret,
hang out in the coffeehouses and bars, and hope for the best.
The University of Iowa changed the literary landscape in the US. During the 1920s,
along the banks of the Iowa River where the summer heat and humidity create a natural
greenhouse for the surrounding agricultural fields of corn and beans, the fine arts flourished.
When F. Scott Fitzgerald and Zelda were dancing and drinking their way through Europe,
when Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas were entertaining Pablo Picasso and Ernest
Hemingway with marijuana-laced brownies in Paris, when Ezra Pound was immersing
himself in the study of Japanese and Chinese poetry and Fascist ideology in Italy, the
University of Iowa fostered young artists in a state known for its conservative, rural values.
Painting, sculpture, theatre, dance, and imaginative writing prospered in Iowa City
during the roaring twenties. Then, just as a decade of severe economic depression hit the
world, Iowa’s creative writing programme began to gain in status and prestige. In 1931,
Mary Hoover Roberts’s collection of poetry, Paisley Shawl, was the first creative writing
master’s thesis approved by the university. Other theses soon followed by such writers as
Wallace Stegner and Paul Engle. Engle’s thesis, Worn Earth, the 1932 winner of the Yale
Younger Poets Award, became the first poetry thesis at the University of Iowa to be published (Wilbers 1980: 39). Norman Foerster, director of the School of Letters, pushed
forward with the creative writing programme throughout the 1930s. But when Engle joined
the faculty in 1937, he jump-started the Iowa Writers Workshop and became its official
director in 1943. He laid the foundation for an institution that would make its mark on the
worldwide writing community.
Engle, a hard-driving, egocentric genius, possessed the early vision of both the Writers
Workshop and the International Writing Program. He foresaw first-rate programmes where
young writers could come to receive criticism of their work. A native Iowan who had
studied in England on a Rhodes Scholarship and travelled widely throughout Europe,
Engle was dissatisfied with merely a regional approach. He defined his ambition in a 1963
letter to his university president as a desire ‘to run the future of American literature, and a
great deal of European and Asian, through Iowa City’ (Wilbers 1980: 85–6).
During his twenty-four years as director, Engle took a group of fewer than a dozen students and transformed it into a high-profile programme of 250 graduate students at its peak
in 1965 (Wilbers 1980: 83). More importantly, he made decisions about creative writing
that still define the academic field. For instance, he divided the Workshop into genres –
poetry and fiction – to make classes easier to teach, took a personal interest in each student,
and functioned as both mentor and godfather. In an essay entitled ‘A Miranda’s World’ in
Robert Dana’s A Community of Writers: Paul Engle and the Iowa Writers’ Workshop (1999),
Donald Justice describes how Engle picked his wife and himself up from the Iowa City bus
station on a cold January day, found them an apartment, and then gave the young poet one
of his own wool suits to see him through the bitter winter.
Throughout the years, Engle brought to campus the hottest literary names of the time
including Dylan Thomas, W. H. Auden, and Robert Frost. Engle then went on to found
the International Writing Program where he poured this same kind of energy into spreading his literary enthusiasm around the globe. Engle’s model of rigorous, genre-based workshops, close-knit communities formed around mentors, and highly respected visiting
writers became the standard in the field.
12 The Handbook of Creative Writing
The Iowa Writers’ Workshop MFA graduates fanned out across the US, and many
entered the ranks of academe. English departments, experiencing dwindling numbers of
majors, began to open up their doors to creative writers whose classes quickly filled. The
black berets and cigarette holders of a previous era were traded in for the tweed jackets and
pipes of faculty life. The turbulent late 1960s and early 1970s saw a growth spurt for creative writers in academe, as students not only demanded the end of the Vietnam War and
greater civil rights, but more seemingly relevant course work.
Iowa Workshop graduates, in turn, set up their own writing programmes at other universities and produced their own graduate students, who once again set up more programmes. In the UK, creative writing in academe began to take hold as well. In 1969, the
University of Lancaster was the first to offer an MA in creative writing. Even when the US
academic job market inevitably tightened, academically-trained writers found their way
into teaching in high schools, in state-run writers-in-the-schools programmes, in the
prisons, in youth shelters, retirement homes, elder hostels, and short, focused summer
workshops and conferences.
From the fall of 1996 to 2001, according to Andrea Quarracino’s report in the AWP Job
List (2005), the number of tenure-track academic job openings listed with the Association
of Writers and Writing Programs (AWP) ranged from forty-six to seventy-two but later
jumped to more than 100 twice, in 2002 and 2004. In 2005, AWP listed over 300 graduate and 400 undergraduate programmes. The literary community at large has grown to the
point that it touches almost every city in the States. In 2005 in the UK, creative writing
has become the fastest growing and most popular field in higher education, with nearly
every college and university offering creative writing courses at the undergraduate and
graduate levels (Beck 2005).
With this growth, new kinds of MFA programmes surfaced. In 1976, Goddard College
in Plainfield, Vermont, was one of the first institutions to offer a high-profile but lowresidency graduate MFA programme in creative writing. Students and faculty came
together for two intense on-campus weeks twice a year, then conducted their courses
through one-on-one correspondence. Students and faculty could then retain their existing jobs while taking part in the programme. There was no need for relocation nor for
financial aid in the form of teaching assistantships. Since the early 1970s, low-residency
programmes have proliferated in the US. Low-residency programmes now exist at such
diverse institutions as Antioch University in California, Lesley University in
Massachusetts, Spalding University in Kentucky, Naropa University in Colorado, the
University of British Columbia, and Lancaster University in the UK with a two-week residency in Ireland.
With the turn of the twenty-first century came specialisation within MFA creative
writing programmes. In 2004, Seattle Pacific University launched an MFA programme
highlighting writing about spirituality. The programme’s website describes its mission:
The low-residency MFA at SPU is a creative writing program for apprentice writers – both
Christians and those of other traditions – who not only want to pursue excellence in the craft
of writing but also place their work within the larger context of the Judeo–Christian tradition
of faith.
In 2006, both Chatham College and Iowa State University planned to offer MFA degrees
in creative writing and the environment. Iowa State’s creative writing programme has
defined its mission this way:
Theories of Creativity and Creative Writing Pedagogy 13
Under the broad rubric of ‘environment’, our MFA program in Creative Writing and the
Environment would offer an original and intensive opportunity for gifted students of nonfiction, fiction, poetry, and drama to document, meditate on, celebrate, and mourn the reciprocal transformation of humanity and our world/s. (Iowa State University 2005: 2)
Likewise, in the UK, students can now earn MAs, MPhils, and PhDs with an emphasis in
creative writing in the traditional categories of poetry, fiction, and playwriting but can also
link creative writing with science, critical theory, journalism or the teaching of creative
writing (Beck 2005).
As writing programmes mature and develop, the field is also re-thinking its pedagogy.
Until around 1990, most creative writing faculty followed the Engle teaching model
without much reflection. A workshop teacher led small groups – The AWP Directors’
Handbook (2003: 5) recommends no more than fifteen, with twelve as ideal, but recognises
that most workshop groups now are between eleven and twenty – through peer oral critiques of completed poems, stories, chapters of novels, or plays. In the Engle model, the
criticism was meant to be tough and could save the writer years of individual trial and error.
But the criticism could also become personality-driven or downright nasty. Little emphasis was placed on structure, work in process, or revision.
Currently, many workshop faculty across the US and UK have adapted Engle’s model and
are experimenting with creating new approaches to teaching creative writing. Some teach
from assignments on technique and structure, whereas others initiate a process of constant
revision. Some lecture to huge rooms of students on technique, then break into smaller workshops. Others emphasise working exclusively in even smaller groups of four or five students.
Texts such as Power and Identity in the Creative Writing Classroom are articulating current
practices and are suggesting new possibilities, in this case offering:
various ways to configure authority: as the expertise of the teacher or of the students, as agency
or action for accomplishing things, as a set of mutually beneficial or agreed-upon guidelines for
fostering success, as a set of evaluation criteria, as seemingly inherent forces in writing and
teaching, and even as authorship itself. (Leahy 2005: i)
In 2004 in the UK, New Writing: the International Journal for the Practice and Theory of
Creative Writing was launched under the editorship of Graeme Harper. This journal, published by Multilingual Matters, includes peer-reviewed pedagogy articles as well as shorter
creative work. Can It Really Be Taught?: Resisting Lore in Creative Writing Pedagogy (Ritter
and Vanderslice 2007) is a collection asserting that creative writing has too long been a
separatist pedagogy based on undocumented and uncritical lore. The editors and authors
examine this lore and argue for reframing the discipline and most importantly its pedagogy
in relation to intellect rather than ego. Some of these same faculty members on both continents who have helped to restructure writing workshops have also made an effort to
provide their own students with pedagogical training. Many MFA programmes, such as
Cardiff University, Antioch University of Los Angeles, and Indiana University, offer
internships, courses or postgraduate certificates in ‘Teaching Creative Writing’.
Writing workshops abroad, too, are now commonplace. A budding writer can go off for
a summer to study creative writing in a number of international cities including Dublin,
Paris, and Prague. The University of Iowa’s Nonfiction Writing Program now offers its
writers study abroad trips to the Philippines. In 2005, Iowa State University set up the first
international writers-in-the-schools programme – a form of service learning – in Trinidad
14 The Handbook of Creative Writing
and Tobago, where Iowa State graduate students taught creative writing in K-12 schools in
a Caribbean country with virtually no creative writing curriculum. Now that creative
writing has established itself as an academic pursuit, its programmes are expanding, especially as academic options expand more generally.
Approaches to creativity and pedagogy
The Iowa Writers’ Workshop declares on its website: ‘Though we agree in part with the
popular insistence that writing cannot be taught, we exist and proceed on the assumption
that talent can be developed, and we see our possibilities and limitations as a school in that
light’. The ‘model for contemporary writing programs’, by its own accounts, bases itself in
part upon the most widely influential theory underpinning creativity and creative writing:
the Romantic myth. The premises of this approach to creativity include that talent is inherent and essential, that creative writing is largely or even solely an individual pursuit, and that
inspiration not education drives creativity. For the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, that means, ‘the
fact that the Workshop can claim as alumni nationally and internationally prominent poets,
novelists, and short story writers is, we believe, more the result of what they brought here
than of what they gained from us’. The Romantic myth is a positive influence on creative
writing in a variety of ways. This approach values the very act of creation that is difficult for
writers themselves to articulate and values the relative isolation that, even in academe, seems
necessary to write. In addition, it links writing with concepts of beauty and originality.
To state openly and confidently that creative writing cannot be taught, however, puts
the field at risk as a serious academic pursuit. If little is gained through completion of an
academic programme, why does it exist within increasingly corporate educational models?
If creative writing cannot be taught, then it might also follow that student work cannot be
evaluated and programmes cannot be assessed; creative writing does not, then, fit easily
academic contexts.
Brent Royster in ‘Inspiration, creativity, and crisis: the Romantic myth of the writer
meets the postmodern classroom’ (2005) points to many aspects of the Romantic myth as
problematic for the field. He demonstrates the dominance of Romantic ideology in popular
culture as well as in the field’s own venues such as the AWP Writer’s Chronicle and Poets &
Writers. Royster turns to the work of Csikszentmihalyi:
Csikszentmihalyi’s model, simply put, refutes the idea that solely the individual generates a creative work. On the contrary, though his dynamic model of creativity still illustrates the individual’s role in the creative process, equal agency is distributed among the social and cultural
systems influencing that individual. (2005: 32)
What feels like inspiration to the isolated writer can be articulated instead as a dynamic
set of forces coming together:
Rather than claiming that this inspiration came from somewhere beyond the writer, it seems
more apt to suggest that the mind of the artist has reached an opportune moment in which
rhythms, sounds, and connotations seem to arise unbidden from memory. (Royster 2005: 34)
This approach allows the writer to define him- or herself as an active participant in a larger,
dynamic process. This view of creativity values both individual writer and culture or community and supports the concept of the multi-vocal workshop-based classroom.
Theories of Creativity and Creative Writing Pedagogy 15
The University of Cardiff offers a graduate degree in the ‘Teaching and Practice of
Creative Writing’, according to its website, thereby claiming that creative writing can be
taught and that the combination of creativity and pedagogy is an important emerging area:
‘With increased interest in the relevance of creativity to current educational practices, this
degree will place students advantageously for many types of teaching opportunities’.
Programmes like this one and the graduate programme at Antioch University of Los
Angeles reconfigure the field to include teaching. As a whole, the tension between the
Romantic myth and various responses to it seems productive, allowing for a variety of
approaches and debates that recognise the seriousness and rigor of the pursuit and the field’s
distinct pedagogical theories and practices.
Those who teach writing are very often situated in academe just down the hall from literary scholars, and most writing instructors would agree that good writers read a lot and
that understanding written texts offers models, tools, and ideas for one’s own writing.
Elaine Scarry argues that beauty begets itself, that to read a beautiful sonnet urges one to
reproduce that beauty, and that ‘this willingness continually to revise one’s own location
in order to place oneself in the path of beauty is the basic impulse underlying education’
(Scarry 1999: 7). Madison Smartt Bell implies that grasping form through reading is foundational for writers: ‘The reader who wants to write as well has got to go beyond the intuitive grasp of form to the deliberate construction of form’ (1997: 22). In other words,
teaching writing depends upon the study of existing texts in order that students comprehend how to construct texts of their own. Kim Addonizio and Dorianne Laux (1997: 105)
offer a similar stance for poets:
Poets need to tune their ears as finely as musicians; that’s why reading poems aloud is a good
idea . . . You need not be familiar with meter to gain an appreciation for the rhythms of writers’
lines, and to begin to work with this principle yourself.
Moreover, Addonizio and Laux put the necessity of studying literature bluntly: ‘To write
without any awareness of a tradition you are trying to become part of would be self-defeating’ (1997: 13). Reading literature and understanding it is part of being a writer.
Some recent literary theory, however, asserts that the author is dead, which creates
natural resistance from living, working, teaching writers. Even those literary critics, like
Harold Bloom, who value authorship, do so in ways that may present obstacles for writers.
Alice W. Flaherty, who documents her own hypergraphia, notes: ‘The theories of Bloom
and Bate, that great precursors are barriers to a writer’s aspiration to originality, predict an
inevitable decline in literature as the sheer mass of predecessors increases over time’ (2004:
106). Some recent literary criticism and theory tells creative writers that we do not exist
at all or that our task is now too great for any reasonable chance of accomplishment because
so much precedes us. Flaherty contradicts this sort of literary theory: ‘writer’s block is not
an inevitable response to masterpieces. They can inspire’ (2004: 106). Indeed, creative
writers can use literature and literary theory to help them understand and respond to the
tradition (see Lauri Ramey’s chapter, ‘Creative Writing and Critical Theory’, in this
section).
Literary criticism and theory, though, place the reader – not the writer – at the centre.
The Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Criticism and Theory asserts that literary theory ‘aspires,
from Aristotle to Hans-Georg Gadamer to Jacques Derrida, toward a systematic statement
of the principles and methods governing interpretation and evaluation’ (Groden and
Kreiswirth 1994: v). This lack of focus on the writer and the writing process is reinforced
16 The Handbook of Creative Writing
by the guide’s ‘inventory of basic critical questions’ (Groden and Kreiswirth 1994: vi), for
only one of these thirteen questions addresses the ‘genesis’ of literary texts. So, literary
theory is well and good but does not suffice entirely for the field of creative writing.
Our other colleagues down the hall, at least in the US, are compositionists, who have
been variously at odds with and in league with creative writers. Composition and creative
writing share a common, lower position in the academic hierarchy than literary studies,
often with composition perceived as the department’s curricular service to the university
and creative writing perceived as the frivolous pursuit of eccentrics. Many creative writing
teachers in the US today have drawn from graduate-school training in teaching composition and from composition theorists. Wendy Bishop is the lead example of a theorist who
straddled the fence between composition and creative writing, who attempted to bring the
theories underpinning the two disciplines together, and who brought not only composition
approaches to creative writing but also vice versa. One of the important arguments
that Bishop (2003: xi) and other compositionists have made to counter the assertion that
writing is less rigorous than literary study is that writing courses have content and that
writing is ‘important work’. Bishop (2003: 234) argues that students ‘should approach composition classes and creative writing classes in pretty similar ways. Overall, both types of
classrooms need to encourage and reward risk taking and experimentation as you learn to
conform to and break genre conventions’. Here, then, is the possibility that composition
and creative writing are versions of the same field.
Yet, creative writing is also a distinct field building its own theories and approaches.
Linguists like George Lakoff have been studying metaphor, cognition, and the arts for
decades. Cognitive scientists, too, have been defining creativity and its processes, but cognitive science has been largely ignored by creative writing teachers. Cognitive science and
creative writing share some history, in that both fields made great gains as academic pursuits only in the last half-century. Bell (1997), in the first section of Narrative Design entitled ‘Unconscious mind’, discusses the cognitive processes of creative writers, though he
does not use terminology or specific theories of cognitive science. Likewise, Addonizio and
Laux claim: ‘We continually make comparisons and connections, often without realizing
that we are doing so, so comfortable are we with seeing in this way’ (1997: 94). These comparisons and connections that become images and metaphors in our poems are results of
cognition and are of primary concern to Lakoff and others.
Not only might creative writing contribute to and reshape current discussions about creativity, we might also recognise how existing theories of cognition underpin current pedagogical practices such as the workshop-based classroom and the battle against cliché as well
as how the theories might improve our teaching. John T. Bruer notes:
Instruction based on cognitive theory envisions learning as an active, strategic process . . . It
recognizes that learning is guided by the learners’ introspective awareness and control of their
mental processes. It emphasizes that learning is facilitated by social, collaborative settings that
value self-directed student dialogue. (1999: 681)
The workshop-based creative writing classroom – a nontraditional academic approach –
presents writing as this sort of active, strategic process: all students must actively engage,
student-writers become increasingly aware of how their own and others’ decision-making
affects written work, and the writing process is situated within an interactive, dynamic
classroom where students share informed criticism. We are already using a pedagogy that
is supported by findings in cognitive science.
Theories of Creativity and Creative Writing Pedagogy 17
Studies show, too, that students’ embedded knowledge structures and prevalent misconceptions are resistant to traditional instruction. As Bruer (1999: 682) states: ‘The result is
that students encode, or learn, schemata that are very different from those which teachers
are attempting to impart’. To apply this problem to creative writing, we might consider, for
instance, how schemata of narrative are embedded in our students’ brains through interaction with television and video games. Or, we might consider students’ relative unfamiliarity with poetry, or their deeply embedded schemata of poetry based on nursery rhymes, as
an opportunity to build new schemata or build upon existing schemata of language’s rhythm.
Cognitive science, too, offers ways to categorise learning and memory. Henry L.
Roediger III and Lyn M. Goff offer an overview: ‘Procedural memory refers to the knowledge of how to do things such as walking, talking, riding a bicycle, tying shoelaces. Often
the knowledge represented is difficult to verbalize, and the procedures are often acquired
slowly and only after much practice’ (1999: 250). Procedural memory is a way to understand learning in creative writing classrooms as slowly accumulated knowledge deeply
internalised through practice that emerges as if known all along. Flaherty (2004: 242) offers
a similar take: ‘on its own the sensation of inspiration is not enough . . . Perhaps the feeling
of inspiration is merely a pleasure by which your brain lures you into working harder’. If we
think of inspiration as a cognitive event, how can creative writing courses best create the
conditions for it and foster the work of writing?
With its workshop model, creative writing is a field with what Lee Shulman has termed
– though for professions like law and medicine – ‘signature pedagogies’, which are distinct
and commonly recognizable
types of teaching that organize the fundamental ways in which future practitioners are educated in their new professions. In these signature pedagogies, the novices are instructed in critical aspects of the three fundamental dimensions of professional work – to think, to perform,
and to act with integrity. (2005: 52)
We must continue to define, support, and improve upon our signature pedagogy.
Ultimately, of course, the burden and the opportunity for both teacher and student is to
write.
Applying theory to practice in creative writing courses
Creative writing has defined itself in opposition to established practices in higher education, and this stance as much as any theory has contributed to classroom practices. David
Radavich (1999: 108) writes that the ‘first wave’ of creative writers in the academy had a
political agenda that sought to include formerly marginalised groups. ‘Such writers frequently and vociferously attacked established hierarchies’, he explains, including academic institutions, which were seen as part of those hierarchies. The rebel attitude resulted
in an approach to teaching markedly different from other disciplines: no lectures, no
exams, decentralised authority, and student ownership of the learning process. Before composition theory touted the importance of audience and process, creative writing professors
recognised that writers benefit from an immediate and worthy audience for their emerging
work. The workshop, therefore, attempts to create a sort of literary café in which students
earnestly analyse a classmate’s poem or story, pointing out how it succeeds and what the
writer might do to improve it and offering perspective that enables the writer to re-envision and revise, often for a portfolio of polished work.
18 The Handbook of Creative Writing
Although different professors and tutor-writers implement the workshop – the signature
pedagogy – differently, common practices exist. Most often, before coming to class, students receive printed copies of each other’s works to read and annotate with thoughtful,
formative criticism. To minimise attempts to justify the work under discussion and to maximise introspection, the writer remains silent while the class discusses his or her draft. The
professor leads the discussion by asking questions, keeps the comments grounded in relevant and meaningful criteria, and maintains civility and respect among all students. Along
with students, professors offer suggestions for improving not just the piece under discussion
but also the approach to and understanding of craft and of the creative process. Professors
also work individually with students during conferences, lecture on specific techniques,
and assign practice writing exercises. By reserving official, final, or summative evaluation
– the grade – of the work for the end of the academic term, the workshop approach privileges process over product and emphasises the complexity and time-consuming nature of
the creative arts.
While student works comprise the major texts for the course, most professors assign
reading from literature anthologies as well but approach and discuss these texts with a
writerly slant. Pulitzer Prize-winning author Jane Smiley (1999: 250) maintains that, for
writers, the study of literature provides distance from the ego and allows students to see the
connections their work has to other literature. In On Becoming a Novelist, John Gardner
notes that the writer ‘reads other writers to see how they do it (how they avoid overt manipulation)’ (1983: 45–6). He advises writers to read to see how effects are achieved, to question whether they would have approached the situation in the same way and to consider
whether their way ‘would have been better or worse, and why’. Similarly, R. V. Cassill, in
Writing Fiction, explains that ‘what the writer wants to note . . . is how the story, its language and all its parts have been joined together’ (1975: 6). Great literature, therefore,
models technique for writers.
As the popularity of creative writing classes has increased, more textbooks focusing on
technique have emerged for use alongside student work and published literature. The AWP
Directors’ Handbook suggests that undergraduate creative writing courses ‘include craft texts
and literary texts (anthologies, books by individual authors, literary periodicals) that offer
appropriate models for student writing’ (2003: 17). Most creative writing textbooks present
chapters discussing specific elements of various genres and offer exercises to help students
master these techniques. While textbooks acknowledge the difficulty of articulating foolproof guidelines, the authors assume would-be writers benefit from instruction on craft. In
her introduction to Write Away: One Novelist’s Approach to Fiction and the Writing Life, for
example, Elizabeth George explains that for those who teach creative writing, ‘craft is the
point’; it is ‘the soil in which a budding writer can plant the seed of her idea in order to
nurture it into a story’ (2005: x). Similarly, Addonizio and Laux state that ‘Craft provides
the tools: knowing how to make a successful metaphor, when to break a line, how to revise
and rewriting – these are some of the techniques the aspiring poet must master’ (1997: 11).
Unlike texts for other disciplines, creative writing texts seldom provide instructor’s editions or supplements that ground the instructions and exercises in theories about learning
to write. As Bishop and Ostrom explain in their introduction to Colors of a Different Horse:
Rethinking Creative Writing, Theory and Practice, because creative writing professors see
themselves as writers more than as teachers, they ‘may well make up a disproportionate
share of those who retreat from theory’ (1994: xii). Indeed, the hallmarks for successful
undergraduate and graduate creative writing programmes in The AWP Directors’ Handbook
state that creative writing faculty consist of ‘writers whose work has been published by